So let's continue our discussion of series.
So last time we proved the comparison test at the end of last
time.
So this was the comparison test.
So which is a statement about series with non-negative terms,
with one being smaller than the other.
And one of two things, or two things are true.
If I have x in and y in, non-negative with y in bigger than or
equal to x in, then the conclusion is if the bigger series
converges, this implies that the smaller series converges.
And the second statement is if the smaller series diverges,
then the larger series diverges.
And we also proved not using the comparison test, but for
the p series that the series won, sum from n equals 1 to infinity of
1 over n to the p, this converges.
I mean, we did use a comparison test for one direction, I guess.
So 1 over n to the p converges if and only if p is bigger than 1.
So this converging implied p has to be bigger than 1 by the
comparison test in what we know about the harmonic series 1 over n,
sum of 1 over n.
OK, so typically in applications, you use these two theorems together to
say something about series that don't look so simple.
So for example, if I look at the series 1 over n squared plus 20, 20 in,
n equals 1 to infinity.
So one could ask, oh, does this converge diverge?
Well, this is a series with non-negative terms.
And remember, I mean, the bigger thing has to converge to give you,
to imply that the smaller thing converges and if the smaller thing diverges,
then the bigger thing diverges.
So don't get the inequalities mixed up.
So I have 1 over n squared plus 20 in, this 20, 20 times n is just making
things bigger on the bottom and therefore smaller overall.
So this is less than or equal to 1 over n squared.
And since this converges, this implies by the comparison test that
sum from n equals 1 to infinity of 1 over n squared plus 20, 20 in,
also converges.
Now, a mistake I'm sure we've all made at some point is mixing up the inequality
and not getting quite the right answer.
So for example, it is also true that 1 over n squared plus 20, 20 in,
is certainly less than or equal to 1 over 20, 1 over 20, 20 times n,
which is also less than or equal to 1 over n.
And so you're tempted to say since this diverges, implies the other series diverges.
But this is not right, because the inequality is wrong.
Remember, if you want to apply the comparison test, you either have to have a bigger
series which converges or a smaller series which diverges.
Here we came up with a bigger series which diverges, which gives us no information at all.
It's if we have a bigger series like 1 over n squared that we know converges,
then do we get information about the original series?
OK, so let's do another well-known test, or at least test you should remember from
calculus, so called ratio test.
So what is the statement of this?
So suppose x n does not equal zero for all n.
And this limit, l equals limit as n goes to infinity of x, z, n plus 1 over x, z, n,
and absolute value exists.
This, then, if l is less than 1, this implies that the series x n converges absolutely.
And if l is bigger than 1, then the series diverges.
Now what about l equals 1?
There's no information for l equals 1.
Meaning you could have a series so that this l equals 1.
And you could have a series where it diverges, and you could also have a series where l equals
1 and the series converges.
So for example, x n equals 1 over n, for example, or even worse, let's say 1, for all n.
But we know that the series 1 diverges, because the individual terms do not converge to zero.
They're just 1 the whole time.
OK?
But for x n equals, let's say, 1 over n squared.
So the one we just saw a minute ago implies l, which is the limit as n goes to infinity of n plus 1 squared over n squared equals the limit.
And as n goes to infinity dividing through 1 plus 1 over n squared, and this equals 1 plus 0 squared equals 1.
OK?
So for this series, the root or the ratio gives this l is 1, and this series converges.
So again, for the case that l equals 1, we have no information.
We can't say anything based on the theorem gives us no information.
So all right, we're going to prove this theorem basically by, so we're not exactly going to use a comparison test, but we are still going to compare this series satisfying.
One of these two assumptions to a series we know, which is namely the ratio test for number 1.
So first off, let's get number 2 out of the way.
So let's suppose l is bigger than 1.
Let alpha be a number between 1 and l.
Actually, we don't even need to do that.
So here's 1.
So since xn plus 1 over xn, absolute value, converges to l.
There exists an integer m0.
So that's a natural number, so that for all n, bigger than or equal to m0, xn plus 1 over xn, absolute value is bigger than or equal to.
So here you can write 1 as, this is equal to l plus minus l minus 1.
So think of this as being epsilon in the definition of convergence.
And so this is over here, l plus l minus 1.
So by the definition of convergence for all n sufficiently large, xn plus 1 over xn, an absolute value has to be in this interval, so it has to be bigger than or equal to 1.
Which implies that for all n bigger than or equal to m0, xn plus 1 is bigger than or equal to xn.
And so I could write this as saying that xn is less than or equal to xn plus 1 is less than or equal to xn plus 2.
And so on.
But this implies that these xn's cannot converge to 0 is end to infinity, because for all n bigger than or equal to m0, they're increasing.
And the only way for an increasing sequence, which is not negative, to converge to 0 is for them all to be 0, and we're assuming they're not 0.
OK.
OK, so that proves 2.
Let's prove 1.
So suppose l is now less than 1.
And now let alpha be a number between l and 1.
So I just want to give myself a little bit of room to work, as you'll see in just a second.
So by the same reasoning as before, so here's l alpha 1 alpha I can write as l plus alpha minus l.
So I should think of this as kind of an epsilon.
Then since xn plus 1 over xn and absolute value converges to l, which is less than alpha, it exists in m0 natural number.
So that, well, n bigger than or equal to m0, xn plus 1 over xn and absolute value is less than or equal to alpha.
OK, so here I have alpha just a little bit bigger than l, and if I draw, so this is l minus alpha minus l.
So since I have this sequence here converging to l for all insufficiently large, this should be in this interval, meaning this should be less than or equal to alpha.
OK, then for all n bigger than or equal to m0, so let me just write this slightly differently x sub n plus 1 is less than or equal to alpha times the absolute value of x sub n.
Now, let's see what this means.
For all n bigger than or equal to m sub 0, let's say I look at the absolute value of x sub n.
So now this n has nothing to do with these n, it's just that the absolute value of x sub n is less than or equal to x.
So maybe I'm off by...
OK, so let's increase that by 1.
Well, OK, so let's not be confusing here.
Let's make this l. Let's make that l.
So for all l bigger than or equal to m0 plus 1, so think of l as playing the role of being in plus 1.
This is less than or equal to l x to the l minus 1, which is less than or equal to x to the l minus 2.
Now with a square, so what I have here is now alpha times alpha x to the l minus 2.
And now let's drop again by 1.
And I can do this as long as this quantity here is bigger than or equal to m.
So I get this is...
If I keep doing that, this is less than or equal to alpha to the l minus m0 next to the m0.
OK?
OK.
So let's shift the things.
Yeah.
OK, so...
All right.
Now we're going to use this to bound the partial sums of the x of n.
So...
It would be a natural number.
And if we look at partial sum, sum from n equals 1 to m of x of n,
this is equal to sum n equals 1 to m0 x n plus sum from n equals m0 plus 1 to m x sub.
Now let me just change dummy variables for signing for the indexing this.
So this is equal to the sum from n equals 1 to m0 of x n.
And now this, I'm going to use this inequality here.
So...
OK, this is kind of a mess.
So this is the inequality that I get from this.
Remember, alpha is less than 1 plus...
OK, so...
And so this is equal to m times l equals m0 plus 1 to m.
OK, everything's fine.
Times alpha to the l minus m0 plus 1.
OK, so all I did here was replace this absolute value of x of the of x of l.
L is just a dummy variable for indexing these guys using this inequality here.
So sorry, I kind of messed that up a little bit, but the important thing is that we have this inequality which somehow tells you this series is not that far from being a geometric series,
at least when l is big enough.
OK, so then when we take an arbitrary partial sums, we split it up into two parts.
The stuff that comes up to this integer m sub 0, which we don't care about, that's just a fixed number, plus this part that we care about, which is after this fixed number m0.
And we use this inequality to replace this by x sub m0 plus 1, alpha to the l minus m0 plus 1.
OK, the thing to remember is that little m is the thing that's changing.
OK, so we're trying to bound this independent of little m.
OK, capital m some 0, that's just something fixed, that could be a thousand.
All right, so this is equal to sum from n equals 1 to m0 xn plus x sub m0 plus 1.
And now if I change the variable again, so l starts at m0 plus 1 and ends at m.
So this is now a sum if I go.
So now for the second sum, n is equal to l minus m0 plus 1.
So now n starts at 0 and ends at m minus m0 plus 1, alpha to the n.
OK, again, m is the thing that's changing here.
And we're trying to bound this independently of little m.
But now we're in good shape because this looks like a geometric series.
Alpha remember is less than 1.
So this is less than or equal to sum from n equals 1 to m0 x sub n plus x sub m0 plus 1 times.
Now instead of just being a sum from 0 up to m minus m0 plus 1, why not throw all of it in there.
And this is equal to n equals 0 xn plus x m0 plus 1 times 1 over 1 minus alpha.
Remember, alpha is a number that we fixed to be less than 1.
If you try to do what we did before and not kind of fix alpha just a little bit to the left of 1 and try to do everything with 1,
you would have wound up with 1 to the n here.
And that wouldn't have finished the proof.
That wouldn't have closed the proof.
But given yourself a little bit of room, which is why we fixed this alpha.
Now this number here is independent of little m.
That's the whole point.
So what have we proven that for all natural numbers, little m, the nth partial sum is less than or equal to a fixed number given by sum from n.
And therefore, this sequence of partial sums is bounded.
And therefore converges.
So kind of the simplest application of this is maybe a series that looks familiar.
So for all x. So this is I guess a theorem slash example.
But for all x and r, the series x to the n over n factorial and equals 0 to infinity.
Converges absolutely here.
Zero factorial is of course one.
And you just use the ratio test.
That's right.
Of the x to the n plus 1 or the n plus first term over x to the n.
So absolute value.
And this equals the limit as n goes to infinity of n plus 1 factorial is equal to n plus 1 times n factorial.
So this cancels with that n factorial and I get x over n plus 1.
Limit as n goes to infinity of just this fixed number over n plus 1 equals 0.
And this is certainly less than 1.
And therefore by the ratio test, this series converges absolutely.
So you know, I got a little hung up on exactly the indexes and matching them up precisely.
But the important thing to take home from this proof was that when this ratio is less than 1,
then this series behaves very much like a geometric series for, as the terms get very, as you go far enough out in the terms.
And this idea of just trying to relate the series to a simple series that you know a lot about.
I mean, basically the only series that you know everything about, namely even how to sum it.
This is how you get this test. And this is also even simpler how you get the next test, which is the root test.
So it's a root test.
Let's take a series and suppose this L, this limit, L equals the limit as n goes to infinity of x sub n to the 1 over n exists.
Then two conclusions just kind of just like in ratio tests.
If L is less than 1, then this implies that the series converges absolutely.
And if L is bigger than 1, then this series converges, no, the series diverges.
And again, just like in the ratio test, no information for L equals 1.
You take the same series that we looked at before.
Let's see, did I leave it up there? Yes. So xn x of n equals 1 for all n. This limit here, L, exists.
It's equal to 1 and that series diverges. If you look at 1 over n squared and I take this limit, I again get 1, but that series converges.
So for L equals 1, we get no information.
So let's, and in this case, it's even clear how we're relating the series to a geometric series.
So let's, in my notes, I proved two first both times. So perhaps I should have written it 1, 2.
I'll know for the future. So suppose L is bigger than 1.
Now we're going to show that this series diverges again by showing that the terms do not converge to 0.
So it's the same idea as before. Here's L, here's 1. So for all n sufficiently large, x to be n to the 1 over n has to be inside this interval.
And since x to the n, x sub n to the 1 over n converges to L, which is bigger than 1.
So it implies there exists an engine to n 0 such that for all n bigger than or equal to n 0, x sub n to the 1 over n is bigger than 1, which implies, for all n bigger than or equal to n 0, x sub n in absolute value is bigger than by just taking in powers of both sides is bigger than 1.
Now since all of the absolute values of x sub n is bigger than 1, this implies that this cannot converge to 0.
So remember, I mean, let me remove this absolute value.
So x sub n cannot converge to 0. Why? I mean, we could go back to the basic definition of convergence of what it means for a sequence to converge to a real number x.
And what it doesn't mean, or what it means for it to not converge to x. So x n does not converge to 0 if there exists a bad epsilon so that x sub n is outside of that interval.
So x sub n is outside of that interval if I go far enough out.
And we certainly have that here. Or you could use this bigger than 1 in fact implies that the limb soup of x sub n is bigger than 1.
Because if I have two sequences, one bigger than the other, then the limb soup of the bigger one is bigger than or equal to the limb soup of the other one, which is 1.
And you're doing in this week's assignment that x n converges to 0 if and only if the limb soup of the absolute values of x n converges to 0.
And this is not. It's bigger than or equal to 1. So we'll leave that there.
Okay, so now for the other case that L is less than 1.
Suppose L is less than 1, then let alpha be the number between L and 1.
Again, since this converges to L, which is less than alpha, for all n sufficiently large, this has to be less than alpha.
So there exists an integer.
I have x to the n to the 1 over n is less than alpha, which implies that for all n, bigger than or equal to m0, x to the n, an absolute value is less than alpha to the n.
Okay, so here again, we're seeing this series, if it satisfies these hypotheses, is very much acting like a geometric series. Remember, alpha is less than 1.
Then for every natural number, little m, if we look at the mth partial sum of the absolute value, say n equals 1.
This is, we split it up again into a part that we don't really care about.
Plus an interesting part. Remember, little m is the thing that's changing. This should look like a little m compared to m0.
And this is less than or equal to sum from n equals 1 to m0, x of n. Again, this is just a fixed number. Plus, now we can put this inequality, n equals m0 plus 1, m alpha to the n.
And this is less than or equal to sum from n equals m0. I'm going to go kind of fast here because I'm running out of space on the board here. Maybe I'll write this out in just a minute, but why this is true.
And this part here is less than or equal to 1 over 1 minus alpha. Because what do I do? This sum is a finite sum.
And it's certainly bigger than if I make the lower bound smaller and the upper bound larger.
And this is just the impth partial sum corresponding to a geometric series with non-negative terms, alpha to the n. And so that's less than or equal to sum from n equals 0 to infinity of alpha to the n, which equals 1 over 1 minus alpha.
So that's how we got this term. And therefore, the partial sums corresponding to the absolute values is bounded. And therefore, that series with the absolute values converges and we have absolute convergence.
Alright, so now let me state a theorem about alternating series. It is not, I prefer not to call it an alternating series test because there's nothing really to test.
I mean, at least with the ratio and root test, you have to compute a limit, which might require some work to do. And therefore, at least to me, that's kind of a real thing that you have to do a little work to test whether a series converges.
And for alternating series, the test is you look at it. And that's it. You don't compute anything. You look at it. So I prefer not to call this theorem about alternating series and alternating series test.
So the theorem is for alternating series. And statement is the following.
Let x sub n be a monotone decreasing sequence
converging to zero. So because this thing is monotone decreasing and converging to zero, it's all, so let me put this in parentheses.
For xn is bigger than or equal to zero for all n.
I cannot have a monotone decreasing sequence converging to zero if one of the xn is less than zero because they keep getting smaller.
This is it. This is not all of the hypotheses. You don't have to compute anything. Then the series minus one to the n, xn equals, let's, of course, you know, we don't have to start at one in particular.
But at least for this statement, let's make it precise. Some from n equals one to infinity of minus one to the n, x of n converges.
And we can just say convergence, not necessarily absolute convergence because again, if we look at minus one to the n, one over n, which is one over n is a monotone decreasing sequence converging to zero, that converges but not absolutely.
And if we have x sub n equal one over n squared, again, one over n squared is a monotone decreasing sequence converging to zero, that would converge absolutely.
So we just have a statement about convergence.
So how we're going to do this is we are, it's kind of like how we proved convergence for p-series in that we're going to show that a certain number of convergence converges.
Subsequence of partial sums converges and then we're going to use that to show that the full sequence of partial sums converge.
Let me state this is claim one.
So the subsequence of partial sums is sub two k.
So this is just a sum from n equals one to two k.
I'm going to show this converges.
So again, just to complete s of m, this is the nth partial sum is the sum from n equals one to m.
So how we're going to do this is we're going to show that these partial sums are in fact monotone decreasing and bounded from below.
So monotone decreasing basically because these guys are monotone decreasing and bounded from below by the same reason.
So let's show that.
Okay, a natural number. If I look at s2k.
So this is the sum.
So this is the sum of n equals two k.
Now, this sequence is monotone decreasing.
So x of two is going to be smaller than x of one.
x of four is going to be less than x of three.
x of two k minus two k minus one is less than zero.
So since this is monotone decreasing, this is bigger than or equal to.
So what I just said has nothing to do with this inequality I'm writing here yet.
So I kept everything here and now I add x of two k plus two minus x of two k plus one.
Okay, so what I was saying was that the x of n's are monotone decreasing.
This term is right after this term. So it's smaller than this term.
So this term here is less than or equal to zero.
Okay, and therefore this thing plus itself plus something that's negative is less than or equal to this thing.
Okay.
Now, what is this thing on the right hand side? This is just.
x two k minus plus x two k minus x two k plus one plus x of two k plus one.
And this is the k plus one two k plus one partial sum.
All right.
This series is monotone decreasing.
Okay.
So to show that this sub sequence of partial sums converges, we just have to show that this sub sequence is bounded, right, or bounded below.
If it's monotone decreasing, it's already bounded above by something.
So we just need to show it's bounded from below.
Now, for okay, a natural number, let's look at s of two k and group term slightly differently.
Okay. So this is equal now to, I'm going to write it as minus x one plus x.
So three.
Okay.
Okay. So this is minus two plus x of two k.
Okay. Okay.
Okay. So this is equal to minus.
So again, the x of n's are monotone decreasing.
All right. So, except three is smaller than except two.
So this is non-negative.
This is also non-negative because x sub five is smaller than x sub four.
So one and so on. So this is also non-negative.
So s of two k is bigger than or equal to minus x of one plus non-negative term.
So two k and remember, x sub n's.
These are monotone decreasing, converging to zero.
And therefore, they're all non-negative.
So this is bigger than or equal to minus x of one.
Okay.
Thus, what do we get?
So for all natural numbers k, I have minus x one is less than or equal to s of two k.
And because these are monotone decreasing, this is always less than or equal to s k equals one.
All right. And this is a, so if you like s of two is just minus x of one plus x of two.
So this sequence of numbers is bounded between this real number and this real number.
And therefore, it's bounded.
And since it's monotone decreasing, it has to have a limit.
So s of two k converges.
Let's call this limit something.
Let's call it s.
All right. We'll show that the sequence of partial sums converge to s now.
We just showed this for a longer sequence of, a longer sub sequence of partial sums.
So let's show it converges to s along the full sequence.
So this is, if you like, claim two, which is that the full sequence of partial sums converges to s.
All right. And we're going to do this by brute force using epsilon m argument.
So remember to show something, a limit of something equals s means for all epsilon, there exists a capital m.
So that for all n bigger than or equal to capital m, s of m minus s, an absolute value is less than epsilon.
Okay. So let epsilon be positive.
So two k converges to s, there exists n and zero, natural number, so that all k bigger than or equal to m zero.
So s of two k minus s, an absolute value is less than epsilon.
Now, we haven't used it all in this proof that the x n's really converged to zero.
We did use that they were not negative at one point.
But now this is where we'll use a converges to zero because here's the intuition.
The s of two k's are converging to something.
So now I just have to look at the odd ones. I've shown all the even partial sums converge to s.
So if I can show the odd partial sums also converge to s, then essentially I'm done.
What's the difference between an even partial sum and an odd partial sum?
Well, it's just x to the two k plus x sub two k plus one, which is converging to zero.
So they don't differ by much.
And that's essentially the whole argument right there.
So since x n's converged to zero, there exists natural number m sub one.
So that for all n bigger than or equal to m sub one, x of n is less than epsilon over two.
I should put an epsilon over two here.
Choose m to be the maximum of two numbers, two m zero plus one, m m one.
So you'll see why I made these choices in just a minute.
So suppose m is bigger than or equal to m.
We now want to show that s sub m minus s is less than epsilon in absolute value.
So there's two cases. If m is even, then m over two is bigger than or equal to capital m over two,
which is the max of these, if I divide by two, that's certainly bigger than or equal to m zero.
And therefore, I use this first inequality, s sub m minus s, which is equal to s two times m over two minus s.
Now m over two is an integer bigger than or equal to m sub zero.
So I can use this inequality, s less than epsilon over two, which is less than epsilon.
And now we do odd.
So again, m is bigger than or equal to capital m.
And there's two cases. m even and m odd, if m is odd.
But k be this integer now. Since m is odd, m minus one is even divided by two, that's an integer.
And so this is so m equals two k plus one.
And since m is bigger than or equal to m zero, this implies a couple of things.
This implies that this integer, so m, this implies that two k plus one is bigger than or equal to two.
So m is just equal to two k plus one, so that's bigger than or equal to m, which is bigger than or equal to two m sub zero plus one.
And therefore k, this integer here is bigger than m zero.
Also m is bigger than or equal to m sub one as well.
I mean m is bigger than or equal to m and m is bigger than or equal to the max of these two things.
So it's bigger than or equal to m one.
Then if I look at s of m minus s, this is equal to s of m.
So the mth partial sum is equal to the m minus first partial sum plus the next term minus s.
Now m minus one in terms of the integer k is equal to two times k.
And now I'm going to take this s and group it with this guy.
And so since k is bigger than or equal to m sub zero, we can use this inequality here after we do the triangle inequality.
So this is less than or equal to s two k minus s plus the absolute value of this thing.
So again, since k is bigger than or equal to m sub zero, I can use this inequality to get this is less than epsilon over two plus this guy.
And since m is bigger than or equal to m, which is bigger than or equal to m sub one, I can use this inequality.
And this is less than epsilon.
So we've done the case of m even or m odd m bigger than or equal to m.
So in summary, we've shown that if m is bigger than or equal to m, s of m minus s is less than epsilon.
And therefore the s of m's converge to s.
And I don't think I have enough time to do this next term.
So we'll stop there.